Introduction

1.1	Effective recruitment and selection is central and crucial to the successful functioning of <Company>. It depends on finding people with the necessary skills, expertise and qualifications to deliver the Company’s strategic objectives and the ability to make a positive contribution to the values and aims of the organisation.
2.	Advertisements

2.1	Vacancies will generally be advertised in an appropriate newspaper or journal, and will not be confined to those media which, because of their particular source of applicants, provide only or mainly applicants of a particular group.

2.2	Advertisements will also be notified to the local job centre.

2.3	All vacancies will also be posted on the Company Intranet, and internal notice boards. <Company> is keen to facilitate internal promotions wherever possible as development opportunities for it’s staff.

2.4	<Company> may, on occasions, decide to restrict advertisement to internal candidates only. Furthermore junior posts will always be advertised internally in the first instance, to provide continuous development of existing members of staff unless the Management team agrees that this is not appropriate due to the specialist skills required for the post involved. 

2.5	Vacancies, which are restricted to internal candidates only will be clearly indicated on the advertisement. All internal candidates will be selected for interview on the same criteria as external candidates. 

2.6	Employees on maternity leave will receive all advertisements for posts advertised in the Company during their period of maternity leave.
3.	Application Form

3.1	Candidates for all posts will, except on some occasions when a vacancy is restricted to internal recruitment, be asked to complete a standard application form, in order that they can be judged on the basis of comparable information.

3.2		In applying for posts, all candidates will be provided with a job description, details of the appropriate conditions of service and details about the Company. A brief statement about the appointment procedure will also be provided and, if possible, an indication of the date (or week) when interviews will be held. The job description will include a list of the main duties and responsibilities of the post, together with an outline of the qualifications and experience which candidates are expected to possess.

3.3		In drawing up the job description and conditions of service the Company will ensure that no job applicant receives less favorable treatment than another on the grounds of disability, gender, race, religion or belief, age, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, caring responsibilities or hours of work, and that no applicant is placed at a disadvantage unjustifiably by requirements or conditions which have a disproportionately adverse effect on a particular group.

3.4	Applicants will be asked to specify whether they have any disabilities, as defined in the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, and whether there are any reasonable adjustments needed for them to attend an interview. All applicants with a disability who meet the essential criteria for a job will be interviewed, and considered on their merits

3.5	Applicants will be required to supply the names and addresses of two people from whom references can be obtained, one of which should normally be the applicant's current or most recent employer. 

3.6	Only references for short listed candidates for interview will be obtained. References will normally be sought prior to interview, unless the candidate indicates otherwise.

3.7	References should normally be made in writing or email, but those received by telephone will be accepted, provided that a note of the conversation is recorded and placed on file.

3.8	All candidates will be asked to declare on the application form whether they have ever been convicted of any criminal offence which cannot be regarded as  ‘spent’ in terms of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974. 

3.9	<Optional paragraph) For posts that involve working with children and vulnerable adults / law enforcement / legal profession / finance work / licensing work (e.g. security), applicants will be asked to reveal details of ‘spent’ and ‘unspent’ convictions. Successful candidates for such posts will be required to provide the necessary documentation in order to complete a standard criminal records disclosure. Posts, which require such a disclosure, will be clearly indicated on the conditions of service and appointment procedure.

3.10	Applicants will also be required to declare if they are related to any member of staff within the Company. Canvassing of members of the Company is not permitted. No manager should be put into a position where he or she is asked to interview a person to whom they are related.

3.11 	It is the Company’s policy not to communicate further with applicants other than those who are shortlisted. A note to this effect is included in the details sent out to applicants.

3.12 	Applicants details will be recorded at the point of receipt.  All information relating to the data collected in the equality and diversity recruitment monitoring form will be hidden from all those involved in the recruitment and selection process. The information collected will be solely used for the purposes of equality monitoring.

3.13 	All completed applications forms are private and confidential and should only be made available to those directly involved in the recruitment and selection process.

3.14 	All application forms will be collated by Human Resources Department / Company Administrator and supplied to the appointing manager and interview panel for shortlisting purposes.

3.15 	A shortlist of candidates will be drawn up for interview, based entirely on merit and suitability for the post but taking account of the Company’s responsibilities in relation to the Disability Discrimination and Equalities Acts. Other than in exceptional circumstances, reasonable notice will be given to ensure that candidates have sufficient time in order to prepare for and make the necessary arrangements to attend the interview. 
4.	Selection Methods

4.1			Interviews will be held by a panel comprising of ideally three persons, but a minimum of two persons, gender balanced wherever possible. The interviewers will encourage candidates to be at ease during the interview, in order that they can give a fair and accurate impression of themselves.

4.2	<Optional paragraph>A representative from Human Resources will be present on all interviews for posts below Director level. The Company’s HR Adviser will be present on interview panels for posts of Director and above.

4.3	The selection and appointment of the Chief Executive will be made by members of the Board and the panel will be chaired by the Board Chairman.

4.4	 A set of questions will be agreed by the interview panel in advance and will be developed from the current job description for the post. The panel will seek to develop questions which ask the candidates to give examples of their previous relevant experience

4.5	All candidates will be asked the same questions in the same order, and their responses rated between 1-10. The panel will each have a copy of the questions and will score independently of each other during the interview. Time is allocated between interviews for the panel to discuss each candidate and to award a total points score. Additional notes may be made by the panel during the interview, however it should be noted that candidates will have access to all information should they request it. 

4.6			It should be remembered that an interview is a two way process, and candidates will be given every opportunity to view the offices where they will work and ask questions about the Company, to ensure that they have a full understanding of the post for which they are applying and the way the Company operates.

4.7			In addition to interviews, a range of other selection techniques may be used. In such circumstances reasonable notice and relevant information will be given to ensure that candidates have sufficient time and information to prepare.

4.8 	Candidates attending an interview will be reimbursed any reasonable expenses incurred.

4.9 			For travelling expenses this would normally be at the appropriate second-class rail fare. 

4.10 	A candidate who withdraws or refuses an offer of appointment for reasons considered by the Company to be inadequate will not be reimbursed his/her expenses.

4.11 	All appointments will be made strictly on merit and related to the requirements of the job.

4.12	The Chief Executive has delegated powers to make appointments to posts below Director level or equivalent. For Director level posts the Chief Executive will consult with the Chairman to determine Board Members’ level of involvement.

4.13 	All interviewed candidates will be notified of the outcome of the selection process as soon as possible, either by telephone or letter. 

4.14 	All unsuccessful candidates’ application forms and interview notes will be retained for one year from the date of interviews taking place. After this date they will be destroyed.
5.	Relevant Checks

5.1		All offers of employment will be made conditional upon satisfactory results from the following:

•	two satisfactory references;
•	confirmation of the right to work in this country (if appropriate)
•	Criminal Records Disclosure (if appropriate).
6.	Probationary Period
	
6.1	All appointments into the Company will be made subject to a probationary period of six calendar months. After three months a review meeting will take place between the post holder and their line manager to discuss progress. At the end of the probationary period, and subject to a satisfactory report by the appropriate head of section or line manager, employees will be notified in writing that they have successfully completed their probationary period. The probationary period can be extended by a further 3 months should the individuals line manager consider this appropriate.
7.	Recruitment Monitoring 

7.1	The Company seeks to recruit employees on the basis of their ability and the requirements of the post. 
	
7.2	The Company wants to ensure that no applicant receives less favorable treatment than another on the grounds of disability, gender, race, religion or belief, age, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, caring responsibilities or hours of work. 
	
7.3	In order to meet this commitment, all candidates are asked to complete a recruitment monitoring form enclosed with the application form. All completed monitoring forms will be treated as confidential. The form will be separated from the application form on receipt and those involved in the selection process will not have access to it. The information given by candidates will be solely used for the purpose of monitoring the recruitment process. 
8.	Exit Interviews

8.1	All employees who leave the employment of the Company voluntarily will have an exit interview with their manager before their last day of employment. 
8.2	Exit interviews provide the opportunity for departing employees to discuss their reasons for leaving. The information provided is useful in identifying trends, learning and development and evaluating the effectiveness of HR policies and practices. 
	
8.3	The appropriate line manager should receive all appropriate information, such as recommendations made for change, or significant issues raised in the questionnaire, whilst bearing in mind confidentiality issues. The exit interview questionnaire will be retained on the employee’s personal file.
